Healthcare professionals play a fundamental role in tackling antibiotic resistance.
Remove this filter Audience: hospital prescribers
information material, poster, toolkit material
Media type
Key messages for hospital prescribers
Factsheet on the emergence and rise of antibiotic resistance in hospital settings and ways to fight this trend.
Page 1 of 1 // 6 Results found
Factsheet for experts
factsheet, information material, toolkit material -
Key messages for primary care prescribers
information material, toolkit material
Infographics explaining the process of antibiotic resistance, the relation between antibiotic consumption and antimicrobial resistance, the recent trend of growing resistance to last-line antibiotics.
A factsheet on antibiotic resistance in primary care provides primary care prescribers with EU and national data on the latest trends.
Antimicrobial resistance is the ability of a microorganism (e.g., a bacterium, a virus) to resist the action of an antimicrobial agent.
A model for a patient dialogue on the basis of available evidence provides guidance and support for primary care prescribers who encounter patient pressure for antibiotics, and promotes appropriate antibiotic use by patients.
A patient leaflet for primary care prescribers to hand out to patients: it explains to patients what antibiotic resistance is and why appropriate use of antibiotics is important.
Page 1 of 1 // 8 Results found
A template letter for national public health authorities to send to primary care prescribers to introduce European Antibiotic Awareness Day.
Factsheet for primary care prescribers
Page 1 of 2 // 17 Results found
communication toolkit
Social media activities that could be undertaken as part of national prudent antibiotic use campaigns, targeting the general public, primary care prescribers and hospital prescribers.
The toolkit contains template materials and key messages for health professionals, ideas for awareness raising activities, and suggested tactics for getting the messages across to both primary care providers and patients.
Toolkit for engaging in social media activities promoting prudent antibiotic use
The toolkit contains template materials and key messages focusing on self-medication with antibiotics, ideas for awareness raising activities, and suggested tactics for getting the messages across to the general public.
Communication toolkit to promote prudent antibiotic use with focus on self-medication with antibiotics
Template letters to pharmacists and primary care prescribers
European Antibiotic Awareness Day
Page 1 of 7 // 65 Results found
Self-medication with antibiotics is not a responsible use of antibiotics
Key messages for the general public
Key messages for the general public: Self-medication with antibiotics
Remove this filter Type: toolkit material
Apply
Antibiotics are not the solution for infections caused by viruses such as common colds or flu.
Key messages for hospital prescribers
Media type
Remove this filter Audience: healthcare workers in hospitals
Poster for nurses in hospitals and healthcare settings: Things to do to keep antibiotics working.
Communication toolkit for professionals in hospitals and other healthcare settings
Page 1 of 1 // 3 Results found
Factsheets
Page 1 of 1 // 8 Results found
Page 1 of 1 // 5 Results found
More information at: www.antibiotic.ecdc.europa.eu
If you have a cold or flu, take care, not antibiotics.
The over-use and misuse of antibiotics leads to antimicrobial resistance.
Remove this filter Type: teabepakme materjal
Page 1 of 1 // 4 Results found
Communication toolkit to promote prudent antibiotic use aimed at primary care prescribers
Page 1 of 2 // 14 Results found
Use them wisely - and never against colds and flu
Ask your doctor for advice: other medicines can help relieve your symptoms
Poster: Antibiotics.
information material, poster, toolkit material
Antibiotics are not the solution for infections caused by viruses such as common colds or flu.
40% of all Europeans wrongly believe that antibiotics work against colds and flu, show the data from the 2013 Eurobarometer on antibiotic consumption and knowledge.
Page 5 of 7 // 65 Results found
Leaflet for infectious disease specialists
Infographic about antibiotic stewardship programmes
Leaflet for hospital prescribers
Page 3 of 5 // 47 Results found
information material, poster, toolkit material
European Antibiotic Awareness Day
Poster for intensive care unit physicians: Things to do to keep antibiotics working.
healthcare workers in hospitals
Key messages for hospital prescribers
The infographic explains what antibiotic resistance is and highlights the extent of the problems that we are facing due to antibiotic resistance and antibiotic consumption in humans - in hospitals and in the community.
Page 1 of 5 // 50 Results found
Page 2 of 2 // 16 Results found
information material, toolkit material, video
1/6 of Europeans are not aware that the misuse of antibiotics makes them less effective (with subtitles)
Antibiotic-resistant bacteria are a danger to us all because they cause infections that are difficult to treat.
Page 1 of 2 // 19 Results found
Page 1 of 3 // 23 Results found
Media type
Media type
Remove this filter Audience: primary care providers
A patient leaflet for primary care prescribers to hand out to patients: it explains to patients what antibiotic resistance is and why appropriate use of antibiotics is important.
Page 1 of 2 // 16 Results found
Page 1 of 30 // 291 Results found
Lill-Karin, Norway, caught bacteria resistant to many antibiotics after an accident and a hospitay stay while on holiday abroad.
The bacterium that was isolated from Mohammed's bloodstream was resistant to many antibiotics, including the last-source antibiotics - a class of last-line antibiotics called carbapenems.
European Antibiotic Awareness Day
Media type
Page 1 of 3 // 25 Results found
At population level:
The two concepts are thus really quite separate, but for historical and professional reasons they are often dealt with together.
Antimicrobial resistance is a worldwide problem.
Nosocomial infections and antimicrobial resistance are two special health issues listed in Annex 1 of Commission Decision 2000/96/EC of 22 December 1999 on the communicable diseases to be progressively covered by the Community network under Decision No 2119/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council.
This is the only exception where systemic antibiotics can be dispensed without a prescription.
Six Member States (i.e. France, Belgium, Slovakia, Czech Republic, Slovenia and Sweden) recently reported decreasing trends in antibiotic use in outpatients;
It is an adaptation of the microorganism to its environment.
The two major areas for management, control and prevention of antimicrobial resistance therefore are:
There are also large variations in antibiotic use among EU Member States, as shown by data from the European Surveillance of Antimicrobial Consumption (ESAC) project;
This new trend is worrying since there are very few compounds in the research and development pipeline that would potentially have an activity against these bacteria and could be marketed within the next 5-10 years.
Additionally, cases of infections due to bacteria totally or almost totally resistant to antibiotics are currently emerging in the EU.
The total burden of antimicrobial resistance across all the communicable diseases listed in Commission Decision 2000/96/EC (including nosocomial infections) is currently unknown.
Antimicrobials are medicinal products that kill or stop the growth of living microorganisms and include among others:
Examples of common multidrug-resistant bacteria are:
These resistant bacteria may persist, generally without causing infection, up to six months and sometimes longer;
Preliminary estimates of the number of deaths directly attributable to hospital-acquired infections due to the most common major multidrug-resistant bacteria are 1/3 to 1/2 of that for hospital-acquired infections overall (see below) (ECDC, preliminary data).
While people die in developing countries because they lack access to the correct antimicrobial treatment, antimicrobial resistance resulting from inappropriate use is causing concern in every continent;
Once established in a person, antibiotic-resistant bacteria can spread to another person and a high antibiotic consumption in a population (hospital or community) strongly favours such spread.
These positive experiences from some EU Member States are the background for the European Antibiotic Awareness Day, a campaign to reduce use of antibiotics in situations where they are not necessary, for example for viral infections such as colds and influenza.
Humans and animals do not become resistant to antimicrobial treatments, but bacteria and other microorganisms can.
Whenever antibiotic-resistant bacteria emerge and develop, infection control precautions are essential to prevent spread from carriers of infected patients to other patients or persons.
In France and Belgium, the decrease was attributed to national action including a yearly, nationwide public campaign on the prudent use of antibiotics;
They are also responsible for infections and isolated from food-producing animals and sometimes isolated from foods.
A more worrying problem is when some bacteria that are normally susceptible to antibiotics become resistant as a result of adaptation through genetic change (acquired resistance).
It is the microorganisms that colonise and sometimes infect humans and animals which become resistant to antimicrobials, not the humans or animals themselves.
However, the major cause of antimicrobial resistance in microorganisms from humans remains the use of antimicrobials in human medicine, in the community and in hospitals and other healthcare settings.
The challenge with multidrug-resistant microorganisms lies in the limited number of remaining options (if any) for therapy of patients infected with these microorganisms.
Microorganisms - also called microbes - include bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites.
Travellers that require hospital care while visiting a country with high prevalence of antimicrobial resistance, within or outside of the EU, and who are subsequently repatriated to their home country, may return being colonised or even infected by multidrug-resistant bacteria.
Part of the burden of antimicrobial resistance in the EU is due to antimicrobials used in food-producing animals.
Even when antibiotics are used appropriately, antibiotic resistance sometimes develops as a natural adaptive reaction of bacteria.
Any use of an antimicrobial forces microorganisms to either adapt or die.
Hygienic precautions for the control of cross-transmission of antimicrobial-resistant microorganisms (infection control), including hand hygiene, screening, isolation, etc.
Conversely, many healthcare-associated infections are caused by microorganisms that are not resistant to antimicrobials.
Use of antimicrobials, which exerts an ecological pressure on microorganisms and contributes to emergence and selection of antimicrobial-resistant microorganisms in populations;
Spread and cross-transmission of antimicrobial-resistant microorganisms between humans, between animals, and between humans and animals and the environment.
There are large intercountry variations in the proportions of resistant bacteria in the EU and these variations, often showing a North-to-South gradient, can be observed for most antimicrobial-resistant bacteria surveyed by the European Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance System (EARSS);
Nosocomial infections correspond to infections acquired in hospitals.
Despite these encouraging experiences, antimicrobial resistance still is high or increasing in a majority of Member States, in particular for common bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Because of exposure to antibiotics, animals may carry antimicrobial-resistant Salmonella and Campylobacter that are transferred from animals to humans through food;
Antimicrobial resistance results in a reduction or elimination of effectiveness of the antimicrobial agent to cure or prevent infection due to this microorganism.
Certain bacteria, e.g. Salmonella and Campylobacter are associated with consumption of contaminated foods and cause diarrhoea;
Even without having been in contact with healthcare, people who travel in a country with high prevalence of antimicrobial resistance may return being colonised by multidrug-resistant bacteria.
Once controlled for size of population, the Member States that use the most antibiotics for outpatients, i.e. Greece and Cyprus, use approximately three times more per inhabitant and per year than the Member State that uses the least, i.e. the Netherlands;
Taking antibiotics always modifies the human normal bacterial flora which often results in side effects, e.g. diarrhoea, as well as emergence and/or selection of antibiotic-resistant bacteria;
Modern medicine relies on availability of effective antibiotics in the case an infectious complication occurs or for prophylaxis of infection.
All antibiotic-resistant bacteria survive in the presence of the antibiotic and continue to grow and multiply causing longer illness or even death.
Treatment of antibiotic-resistant bacteria may also require intravenous antibiotics given in hospitals instead of oral antibiotics that could be taken by patients at home.
The EARSS Annual Report 2007, as well as national data, indicated decreasing resistance trends in Streptococcus pneumoniae, a bacteria commonly responsible for infections in outpatients, in particular children;
Additionally, within the body of a human being, the genes coding for antibiotic resistance in one species of bacteria can easily spread to other bacterial species through an exchange of genetic material.
Examples of such bacteria are carbapenemase (KPC)-producing Enterobacteriaceae (often Klebsiella pneumoniae), andmultidrug-resistant Acinetobacter.
In the continuous fight for "ecological space", all resistant bacteria are selected as the antibiotic kills the still-susceptible bacteria around them.
Infections caused by antibiotic-resistant bacteria may require more care as well as alternative and more expensive antibiotics, which also may have more severe side effects.
Patients colonised by/carrying resistant bacteria are generally more likely to develop an infection with these resistant bacteria rather than with susceptible variants of the same bacteria;
The two major drivers for antimicrobial resistance are:
For bacteria, antibiotic resistance is the ability of bacteria to resist to the action of an antibiotic.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has issued a global strategy and guidelines to help countries in setting up systems to monitor antimicrobial resistance and implement interventions, e.g. to ensure that antibiotics can only be purchased with a medical prescription.
Since October 2008, it is possible for patients in the UK who are asymptomatic but who have a diagnosed genital infection with Chlamydia to obtain from pharmacists (without a prescription) a single dose of the antibiotic azithromycin, representing a complete treatment course.
Antimycobacterial drugs (which are antibacterials specifically active against tuberculosis and other mycobacterial infections)
Without effective antibiotics, intensive care, organ transplants, cancer chemotherapy, care of preterm babies, or even common surgical procedures, such as hip or knee replacement, would not be possible.
There is no rational choice of antibiotic therapy for treating such patients and treatment often relies on old and toxic antibiotics such as colistin.
In a few countries, decreasing trends are being observed for antibiotic use in outpatients and for antibiotic resistance in bacteria commonly responsible for infections in outpatients.
This issue of multidrug resistance is relevant for all microorganisms, including bacteria responsible for healthcare-associated infections, microorganisms responsible for food- and waterborne infections, tuberculosis, and microorganisms responsible for sexually-transmitted diseases, e.g. gonorrhoea and HIV.
Antiparasital drugs (active against malaria and other infections due to parasites).
Based on Directive 2001/83/EC and national legislations in Member States, antimicrobials to be used systemically (i.e. not locally) should only be dispensed at pharmacies upon presentation of a prescription, usually from a medical doctor.
Because antimicrobial-resistant microorganisms fail to respond to therapy, infections due to these microorganisms result in greater risk of death, prolonged illness and stay in hospitals and greater risk of death.
Levels of antibiotic consumption consistently correlate with levels of antibiotic resistance, i.e. the more antibiotics are being used in a population, the more resistance to antibiotics there will be in bacteria responsible for infections in this population.
Antibacterials (often called antibiotics, active against bacterial infections),
Despite this, dispensation of antimicrobials without a prescription still occurs at pharmacies in several Member States.
Prudent use of antimicrobials (i.e. only when needed, with the correct dose, at correct dose intervals and for a correct duration);
Antimicrobial resistance, i.e. being resistant to one or several antimicrobials used for therapy or prophylaxis, is not a disease but a characteristic that may apply, as a matter of principle, to each of the microorganisms responsible for the communicable diseases listed in Commission Decision 2000/96/EC and for nosocomial and other healthcare-associated infections.
Multidrug resistance corresponds to resistance of a microorganism to multiple antimicrobials.
Bacteria have antibiotic resistance when specific antibiotics have lost their ability to kill or stop their growth.
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
The term "Healthcare-associated infections" is now preferred because it includes not only infections acquired in hospitals, but also in other settings where healthcare is provided, e.g. long-term care facilities, nursing homes, home care, etc.
When antibiotics are needed (this decision is made by a medical doctor who writes a prescription), they should then be used appropriately, i.e. at the correct dose, at correct intervals and for the prescribed duration, to optimise effectiveness to cure the infection and minimise emergence of resistance;
Antimicrobial-resistant microorganisms, including multidrug-resistant types, are often responsible for healthcare-associated infections, but they are also responsible for infections in patients outside hospitals and can be found as part of the normal bacterial flora of healthy individuals, in pet animals and in the environment.
Antibiotics used to treat and prevent infections in animals belong to the same chemical groups as those used in human medicine, therefore animals may carry bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics also used to treat infections in humans;
Antimicrobial resistance is the ability of a microorganism (e.g., a bacterium, a virus, or a parasite, such as the malaria parasite) to resist the action of an antimicrobial agent.
Antibiotics should not be used when they are not needed, e.g. for viral infections such as common colds or influenza;
Antifungals (active against fungal infections),
Antivirals (active against viral infections, e.g. influenza, HIV, herpes infections),
The EARSS Annual Report 2007 indicated that seven Member States now report significantly decreasing percentages of MRSA among Staphylococcus aureus from bloodstream infections.
Page 1 of 5 // 47 Results found
Apply
Paolo fell ill with a serious urinary infection with an E.coli resistant to many antibiotics.
Things you can do, or collaborate on
Key messages for hospital pharmacists
information material key messages toolkit material
Your tasks related to improving antibiotic use include [42,56,76,94,95]:
If you see staff members at the hospital or healthcare setting who breach guidelines or protocols, ask them why they are doing so and provide them with tools to understand what they are doing wrong [69] [expert consensus].
These reduce treatment durations and lower the overall cost of care [77].
Support the development and implementation of an antibiotic stewardship programme within your organisation [69,94].
Check that antibiotic prescriptions follow antibiotic treatment protocols, based on evidence-based guidelines.
f) Analysing data on antibiotic use and costs for the purpose of surveillance and benchmarking;
d) Consulting with hospital prescribers and providing them with feedback to ensure the quality of antibiotic prescribing;
Pharmacists can have multiple roles in the emergency department, including giving real-time feedback and consultation regarding prescribing practices, and identifying drug interactions.
b) Collaborating with the infectious disease specialist and the clinical microbiologist to implement the antibiotic stewardship programme;
Collect and share data on antibiotic use and costs at ward level and hospital level [56,76].
e) Implementing interventions on formulary restrictions, such as pre-approval and post-authorisation requirements, and assessing compliance with these restrictions;
Train hospital prescribers regularly on prudent antibiotic use and participate in meetings on implementing evidence-based hospital antibiotic guidelines [31,53,94,95].
Provide feedback and advice to prescribers on antibiotic choice, dose, duration optimisation and route of administration [31,94].
Together with prescribers, provide patients who have to continue antibiotic therapy after discharge with information on use of antibiotics at home [31].
Compliance with formulary restrictions as well as pre-approval and post-authorisation requirements for specific antibiotics decreases the use of these antibiotics in intensive care unit settings [43].
Special order forms limit the duration of perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis and reduce the incidence of surgical site infections, antibiotic use and costs [56].
Encourage clinicians to perform appropriately timed parenteral-to-oral switches [56].
a) Participating in the antibiotic stewardship team, as a key member of the team;
g) Supporting evidence-based hospital antibiotic guidelines for common infections and for surgical prophylaxis;
c) Improving the quality of antibiotic prescribing (e.g. checking for drug interactions, optimising dosage and route of administration, preventing adverse events);
Pharmacist-led parenteral-to-oral switches improve clinical outcomes (e.g. shortening the duration of parenteral therapy without negatively impacting on clinical outcomes) [56].
h) Managing your hospital's antimicrobial formulary (i.e., list of drugs available for prescribers).
It is everyone's responsibility to use antibiotics prudently.
Without #antibiotics, we won't be able to treat simple infections.
Patients, doctors, nurses: it is everyone's responsibility to use antibiotics prudently.
#Antibiotics are only effective against bacterial infections and cannot help against cold or #flu.
Prudent use of #antibiotics and infection prevention & control can fight #AntibioticResistance and help #KeepAntibioticsWorking.
#KeepAntibioticsWorking.
What are you doing to #KeepAntibioticsWorking?
Share what you are doing to #KeepAntibioticsWorking!
Join us and #KeepAntibioticsWorking!
Examples of social media messages
He took this for 21 days.
Commentary: case notes
Nobody knows where he picked up the infection.
Paolo is a 55 year old University Professor in Rome, Italy.
It is therefore necessary to see a doctor and to have microbiological testing performed.
In August of 2010, Paolo had gone motor-boating alone to Ponza, a small island off the coast of Italy.
An important message for patients is that the right antibiotic needs to be prescribed for treatment.
Since he was afraid to motor-boat back to Rome by himself in case he became very ill, his brother-in-law accompanied him.
He consulted with his brother-in-law, who is a medical doctor and was spending his holidays in Ponza.
Despite this, he continued the course of ciprofloxacin for a week or more, with the hope of being well enough to motor-boat back to Rome and seek a full medical examination and laboratory tests.
His symptoms resolved after that and he has been well ever since.
His condition did not improve over the next three days and his fever did not abate.
This antibiotic can appear sensitive in the laboratory, but is actually not effective against ESBL E. coli when given for treatment in humans.
It took two months and three courses of different antibiotics before Paolo's infection was successfully treated.
He was aware that it would be important to know the results of his urine culture in order for a doctor to prescribe the correct antibiotic.
Additionally, he was allergic to one of them, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Ciprofloxacin can be given by mouth, so is easy to take and is usually effective in treating urinary tract infections.
It is concerning that such highly resistant bacteria are spreading in the community and causing infections in patients with no contact with the hospital.
Aside from the carbapenems, which are given intravenously and require some type of hospital stay, there were only few antibiotics that he could take that would be effective against his infection, and few that he could take by mouth.
He was prescribed amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, which he took by mouth for four weeks.
Paolo was on the island of Ponza where there was no possibility of laboratory testing of his urine to better understand which antibiotics the bug could be treated with.
On arrival at the mainland, he immediately went to a large hospital in Rome where he had a urine culture and clinical examination, which confirmed he had a complicated urinary tract infection.
He then called a friend of his, an infectious disease specialist, who suggested that he take fosfomycin by mouth in the correct dose for his infection.
It is important to treat with the right antibiotic, since these types of highly resistant bacteria can cause patients to be sicker and to have a worse outcome.
He was also found to have an enlarged prostate gland, which was the likely cause of his infection.
His condition improved, but four days after his treatment was discontinued, he began having fever again and his symptoms of a urinary tract infection returned.
The antibiotic that Paolo ended up taking was amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, which he took by mouth.
Paolo could not take trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, which is an oral antibacterial agent, because he was allergic to it.
Carbapenems can only be given intravenously, meaning spending some time at the hospital.
Globally, ESBL- producing bacteria are being found as the cause of community-acquired infections, and very frequently urinary tract infections.
After arrival in Ponza, he felt that he had symptoms of a urinary tract infection, but did not pay too much attention at the time, because he thought his symptoms could have been due to dehydration from the summer heat.
This is why his condition apparently improved during amoxicillin-clavulanic acid treatment, but the infection was not eradicated and suddenly relapsed after the therapeutic course.
His brother-in-law suggested that he take ciprofloxacin, a fluoroquinolone antibiotic which is one of the most frequently used antibiotics for urinary tract infections.
Important points to note in this case are that Paolo had developed an infection with a community-acquired highly resistant E. coli.
After a while, however, he developed a fever with shaking chills and the symptoms of his urinary tract infection intensified.
ESBLs are enzymes that make bacteria, most commonly E. coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae, resistant to most β-lactam antibiotics, including penicillins, cephalosporins and aztreonam.
The carbapenems, to which his E.coli was sensitive, are the antibiotics of choice in patients with infections with ESBL-producing bacteria.
The culture showed that he was infected with a bacterium called Escherichia coli (E. coli), which produced an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) and was resistant to many antibiotics, including ciprofloxacin.
The laboratory results showed that the only antibiotics that Paolo's E. coli was sensitive to were amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, fosfomycin and finally, a class of last line antibiotics called the carbapenems.
While on holiday, Paolo developed a complicated urinary tract infection with an E. coli isolate that produced extended-spectrum-beta lactamases (ESBL).
Paolo's E. coli was found to be sensitive only to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, fosfomycin and to the carbapenems, a class of last-line antibiotics, which are the treatment of choice for bacteria that produce ESBLs.
coli was resistant to the fluoroquinolones, a class of antibiotics that can also be taken by mouth to treat urinary tract infections, including complicated ones.
Letters for national public health authorities to send to pharmacists and primary care prescribers to introduce European Antibiotic Awareness Day (EAAD), to promote appropriate use of antibiotics and inform patients about the risks of self-medication with antibiotics.
Template letters to pharmacists and primary care prescribers
In addition, healthcare systems can differ from country to country.
The key messages need to be carefully adapted as well, since professionals across Europe might have different roles than those described in the document.
Some of the messages are indicated to be "expert consensus", instead of being linked to a reference taken from the scientific literature.
It is important to stress that the template materials provide a core of information and common messages but will be most effective if adapted to respond to the needs and situations in each country, or even in each healthcare setting.
Moreover, the materials aim at creating a sense of individual responsibility in tackling antibiotic resistance and at empowering professionals to take action.
The key messages for this toolkit derived from a thorough review of the scientific literature by ECDC experts and were developed following an extensive consultation and editing process.
The toolkit includes: key messages, checklist for prescribers, factsheets, infographic about antibiotic stewardship, leaflets, letters, posters, presentation, social media cards.
The objective of this toolkit is to support efforts to increase prudent use of antibiotics in hospitals and other healthcare settings through dissemination of evidence-based educational and information materials.
Terms of use
- Infection prevention and control professionals,
This refers to the agreement reached by ECDC experts, EAAD Technical Advisory Committee members, and other external experts and stakeholders.
The issues surrounding antibiotic resistance in hospitals and other healthcare settings may differ from country to country.
- Professionals in emergency departments, in intensive care units, and in long-term care facilities.
Professionals are encouraged to mix and match the key messages and the template materials, to address their own specific needs.
Communication toolkit for professionals in hospitals and other healthcare settings
The primary target audience for this toolkit is professionals in hospitals and other healthcare settings, such as long-term care facilities, who have different roles and influence in the use of antibiotics in such settings.
Remove this filter Audience: general practitioners
European Antibiotic Awareness Day
Up to half of all antibiotic use in hospitals is unnecessary of inappropriate.
Communicating to professionals in hospitals and long-term care facilities
Burden of infections with resistant bacteria
Each year, 33000 people die from an infection due to bacteria resistant to antibiotics.
The burden of infections is comparable to that of inﬂuenza, tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS combined.
Antibiotic misuse in hospitals is a major driver of antibiotics resistance.
Antimicrobial use in: Long-term care facilities
7 / 10 antimicrobials were prescribed for treatment of an infection and 3 in 10 for prophylaxis.
We would appreciate that graphic elements are not added, with the exception of additional logos.
ECDC is happy to double check modifications.
Please do not change colours, spacing, arrangement or font size (if not absolutely necessary).
If you modify the file and install the font, ECDC requires that you de-install the font after finishing the modification since ECDC is not allowed to grant a license for the font.
In case you would like to modify the infographic, please note that you will need to install the Font package (Meta Pro) before opening the Illustrator or InDesign file.
Do not open the .ai file without having the fonts installed first.
infographic, information material, toolkit material -
Overview of the data on antimicrobial resistance in Europe released in 2014
Antibiotic resistance - an increasing threat to human health
Healthcare-associated infections - a threat to patient safety in Europe
1 in 3 patients received at least one antimicrobial on any given day.
Carbapenems are a major last-line class of antibiotics to treat bacterial infections.
Growing resistance to last-line antibiotics: 2013
The infographic explains what antibiotic resistance is and highlights the extent of the problems that we are facing due to antibiotic resistance and antibiotic consumption in humans - in hospitals and in the community.
This infographic explains how antibiotic resistance spreads in animal farming, in the community, in healthcare facilities and through travel.
Antimicrobial use in European hospitals and long-term care facilities
A total of 8.9 million HAIs were estimated to occur each year in European hospitals and long-term care facilities
The burden is comparable to that of inﬂuenza, tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS combined.
Things you can do in your hospital or institution
These include [54,79-81]:
Promote proactive audits and ensure that individual prescribers receive feedback [54,56].
c) Implementing targeted educational activities and training that:
i. optimise the diagnostic and therapeutic management of patients;
Reducing antibiotic costs by 33%.
If these guidelines do not exist in your hospital, then support their development [31,54,56].
g) Ensuring that prudent antibiotic use and prevention of antibiotic resistance are "priority action areas" in your hospital's annual plan.
Your tasks related to improving antibiotic use include [31,42,56,71,75]:
Implementing antibiotic stewardship programmes has resulted in [46]:
Many prescribers and other healthcare professionals believe their training in prudent antibiotic use is insufficient.
Certain structural strategies can improve antibiotic prescribing and patient outcomes.
Reducing antibiotic consumption by 20%,
Clinicians are responsible for prescribing and they must be fully engaged in shared decision-making with the antibiotic stewardship team [42].
a) Establishing a multidisciplinary team for your hospital antibiotic stewardship programme.
e) Setting quality indicators and quantity metrics to measure the progress and outcomes of the antibiotic stewardship programme;
This team should include infectious disease specialists, clinical microbiologists and pharmacists, and should receive dedicated funding and resources;
Strengthen surveillance activities for antibiotic use and antibiotic resistance [56].
ensure that antibiotic stewardship recommendations are followed;
Antibiotic guidelines and regular educational sessions and rounds improve how physicians manage infections [78].
Restrictive measures include pre-approval and post-authorization decisions for specific antibiotics;
d) Promoting prescribers and antibiotic stewardship team leaders to collaborate and conduct proactive audit and feedback.
computer-supported decisions, which link clinical indication, microbiological data and prescribing data together, and
They are asking for local antibiotic guidelines, specific education and antibiotic stewardship teams [25,27].
address behavioural factors shaping misuse of antibiotics;
Support your multidisciplinary antibiotic stewardship team by designating the specific leaders for accountability and drug expertise, and by stating the supportive roles of other key groups [42,71].
f) Ensuring that antibiotics listed in hospital formulary are always available; and
iv. enhance prevention and control of healthcare-associated infections and the spread of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
Infectious disease specialists, clinical microbiologists, and clinical pharmacists are all key leaders in the antibiotic stewardship team [56,76].
Fund and promote educational activities, training, and meetings about antibiotic stewardship and antibiotic resistance for all healthcare professionals (physicians, infectious disease specialists, pharmacists, microbiologists and nursing staff) [19,53,56].
Antibiotic stewardship programmes, together with infection prevention and control practices, can increase patient safety and quality of care and reduce hospital costs across all services by improving how antibiotics are used, as well as by decreasing C. difficile infections and other adverse events [19,42].
For antibiotic stewardship teams to be successful, they need the active support of other key professionals in hospitals, such as infection prevention and control professionals, emergency department practitioners, hospital epidemiologists, nurses and IT staff [42,77].
Promote using local microbiology and antibiotic resistance patterns to inform guidelines and empirical antibiotic choices [31].
Prioritise antibiotic stewardship and infection prevention and control policies, as well as strategies and activities that support prudent antibiotic use and prevent the spread of antibiotic-resistant bacteria [31,71].
Both restrictive measures and persuasive measures can decrease antibiotic use [19,43,54,56]:
Promote peer-review of antibiotic prescriptions and infection management, and encourage communication among healthcare professionals [71].
use of rapid and point-of-care diagnostic tests.
Promote compliance with evidence-based guidelines for infection control measures, to reduce transmission of antibiotic-resistant bacteria [82].
Promote compliance with evidence-based guidelines for diagnosing and managing common infections, and for perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis.
Reducing the incidence of hospital-acquired infections,
Persuasive measures include proactive audit and feedback by infectious diseases physicians, microbiologists and pharmacists.
b) Supporting implementation of antibiotic guidelines and infection prevention and control measures;
Provide funds and resources for an antibiotic stewardship programme (including e.g., salaries for dedicated staff, IT capabilities, rapid and point-of-care diagnostic tests) [31].
Improving antibiotic use in the emergency department can lead to better antibiotic use across the entire organisation, because the emergency department is a common point of entry to the inpatient setting [77].
Things you can do
a) Is there a high probability of a bacterial infection, rather than colonisation or a viral infection?
g) Initiating antibiotic treatment as soon as possible in patients with severe infection;
Be a good source of information for your patients and help them understand the importance of prudent antibiotic use.
Key messages for hospital prescribers
f) Re-evaluating treatment after 48-72 hours, or when results from microbiological samples are available;
Could an antibiotic with a narrower spectrum be used to treat the infection?
d) Does the patient have an infection that will respond to antibiotics?
a) Take antibiotics exactly as prescribed;
Answer the following key questions to optimise antibiotic therapy.
Ensure that patients (and their families) understand the reasons for antibiotic therapy, and key points related to antibiotic use, including to [expert consensus]:
If you see staff members at the hospital or healthcare setting who breach guidelines or protocols, ask them why they are doing so and provide them with tools to understand what they are doing wrong [expert consensus].
i.
Is the patient on the correct antibiotic(s), correct dose, and correct route of administration?
i) Informing your patients of any antibiotics prescribed, and their potential adverse effects; and,
j) Participating in annual training courses on prudent antibiotic use.
h) Considering local microbiology and antibiotic resistance patterns when prescribing empirical antibiotic treatments;
For how long should the patient receive the antibiotic(s)?
Only start antibiotic treatment if there is evidence of a bacterial infection, and do not treat colonisation [31,72].
Avoid unnecessary antibiotic prophylaxis [31,73].
Follow antibiotic treatment protocols, based on evidence-based guidelines, and apply infection prevention and control measures that are established in your setting [31] [expert consensus].
b) Never save antibiotics for later use;
As hospital prescribers your tasks related to improving antibiotic use include [31,42,43,52-54,56,70,71,90]:
c) Have you checked for recent antibiotic use, drug allergies, use of immunosuppressive therapy, recent hospitalisation or institutionalisation, recent travel outside of Europe, and microbiology results for the previous 3 months?
A pharmacist-led parenteral-to-oral switch resulted in shortened parenteral therapy durations without negatively impacting on clinical outcomes [56].
Consult the antibiotic stewardship team when needed, for examples when you prescribe an antibiotic outside of normal guidelines [31,56] [expert consensus].
Consulting the antibiotic stewardship team increases the quality of drug prescribing and improves patient outcome [56,83].
If in doubt, consult with antibiotic stewardship team [31,42,53,70,71]:
d) Follow infection prevention and control guidance;
Reviewing initial antibiotic treatment after 48-72 hours and switching from parenteral to oral administration (when possible), reduces antibiotic resistance rates and improves clinical outcomes [37,54,57,71,92,93].
b) Identifying relevant individual patient background when evaluating the need for an antibiotic prescription, including recent antibiotic use, drug allergies, use of immunosuppressive therapy, recent hospitalisation or institutionalisation, recent travel outside of Europe, and microbiology results for the previous 3 months;
Infectious disease specialist interventions have been associated with a significant improvement in the quality of antibiotic prescribing and leading a reduction in antibiotic use [83].
Prescribing the shortest evidence-based duration of antibiotic treatment reduces emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria [54,56,71,91].
a) Prescribing according to evidence-based hospital antibiotic guidelines for common infections and for surgical prophylaxis;
d) Never share leftover antibiotics with other people.
b) Have the appropriate cultures been taken before starting antibiotic therapy?
c) Never use leftover antibiotics from previous treatments;
e) Ensuring that relevant cultures are taken before starting antibiotics;
Correct timing and optimal duration of antibiotic prophylaxis for surgery leads to fewer surgical site infections, and decreases the emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria [73].
Document the indication of antibiotic treatment, drug choice, dose, route of administration and duration of treatment in the patient chart [31,42,70,71].
Using antibiotic guidance and attending educational rounds improve antibiotic prescribing [78].
Documenting indication, drug choice, dose, route of administration and duration of treatment in the patient chart leads to better use of antibiotics [71].
Taking microbiology samples before starting empirical antibiotic therapy and streamlining antibiotic treatment based on culture results help improve antibiotic use [31,70,71].
c) Documenting the indication for antibiotic treatment, drug choice, dose, route of administration and duration of treatment, in the patient chart, when you prescribe an antibiotic;
ECDC would like to hear from you!
Terms of use
ECDC would be interested to know how and where the campaign communication materials are used, particularly if you think that your initiatives could be listed on the ‘National activities' page of this website.
For further detailed information and ideas how to use these materials and organise a campaign on self-medication with antibiotics, please see the Guidance note.
Any other entities must obtain the consent of the ECDC before using the European Antibiotic Awareness Day campaign communication materials.
Permission to use the European Antibiotic Awareness Day campaign communication materials is granted to all non-profit organizations and healthcare associations as well as all European healthcare authorities and governmental bodies conducting campaigns aimed at reducing antibiotic resistance and promoting the appropriate use of antibiotics.
To obtain permission for use of these materials, please contact: EAAD@ecdc.europa.eu
For any questions you may have on the materials, please contact: EAAD@ecdc.europa.eu
Instructions for use of these materials
Stories of people whose lives were dramatically changed by antibiotic-resistant superbugs
The week of 14-20 November 2016 marks the second World Antibiotic Awareness Week.
Each year across Europe, EAAD is marked on 18 November.
What is ECDC doing to keep antibiotics working?
ECDC also partners with numerous professional and patient organisations, the European Commission, the European Food Safety Authority, the European Medicines Agency and the World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe, as well international campaigns in the United States, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and Japan, to undertake a number of actions to address antimicrobial resistance.
Activities related to this topic at ECDC take place under the Antimicrobial Resistance and Healthcare-associated Infections programme .
ECDC's main areas of work include surveillance, epidemic intelligence, developing evidence-based guidance and systematic reviews, training, support to the EU Member States.
ECDC also launched, and regularly updates, a directory of online resources for the prevention and control of antimicrobial resistance and healthcare-associated infections to support EU Member States that need to develop national guidelines.
Since 2008, ECDC coordinates the European Antibiotic Awareness Day, a public health initiative which aims to provide a platform and support for national campaigns on the prudent use of antibiotics.
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) contributes to keep antibiotics working by ensuring that Europe has a good overview of the situation on antibiotic resistance and antibiotic consumption with a yearly update of its European surveillance data, and actively promotes and advocates prudent use of antibiotics.
Spread the word
Print and disseminate the information materials available on this website.
Join us on Facebook: http://www.facebook.com/EAAD.EU
Help advertise the European Antibiotic Awareness Day in newsletters, websites, in the media and on the Internet, by inserting a link on your website, in your e-mail signature or in your blog.
Follow us on Twitter, use #EAAD or take part in our twitter chats on EAAD: http://www.twitter.com/EAAD_EU
If you are a prescriber, you can see various materials for informing patients about antibiotic resistance and explaining why appropriate use of antibiotics is important.
If you can take part in or support European Antibiotic Awareness Day campaign, we will be delighted to cooperate with you and to provide you with more information on our activities and materials.
Talk about the European Antibiotic Awareness Day and its significance with your friends, family and colleagues.
If you are organising a communication campaign to raise awareness on prudent use of antibiotics, you can use our toolkits and campaign materials .
ECDC is looking forward to collaborating with stakeholders at pan-European level and welcomes dialogues with organisations throughout the world running awareness campaigns on prudent use of antibiotics.
Join the campaign
Key messages for clinical microbiologists
Key messages for hospital infection prevention and control professionals and hospital epidemiologists
Key messages for hospital managers / administrators
Key messages for hospital infectious disease specialists
Key messages for junior doctors and students
Key messages for long-term care facilities - physician and managers
Materials for professionals in hospitals and other healthcare settings
General key messages for healthcare professionals in hospitals and other healthcare settings
Key messages for intensive care unit - physicians and managers
Page 1 of 1 // 5 Results found
The toolkit contains template materials and some suggested key messages focusing on self-medication with antibiotics, ideas for awareness raising activities, and suggested tactics for getting the messages across to the general public regarding prudent use of antibiotics, especially to people self-medicating with antibiotics.
Instructions for use of these materials
Poster: Is this an effective protection against colds or flu?
Neither are antibiotics.
information material, poster, toolkit material -
Jama.
The commonality of risk factors for nosocomial colonization and infection with antimicrobial-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, enterococcus, gram-negative bacilli, Clostridium difficile, and Candida.
Inadequate antimicrobial treatment of infections: a risk factor for hospital mortality among critically ill patients.
1/6 of Europeans are not aware that the misuse of antibiotics makes them less effective
The findings are summarised in three Eurosurveillance articles:
The key messages are based on the results of the point prevalence surveys.
The wide variation in their use indicates the need to review their indications in many countries and hospitals.
The proportion of broad-spectrum antibiotics varied from 16% to 62% across Europe.
While this practice may reduce the risk of infection in women, there is no evidence about its effectiveness when applied widely to elderly patients.
HAIs in hospitals alone cause more deaths in Europe than any other infectious disease under surveillance at ECDC.
In addition, this practice is associated with increased antimicrobial resistance.
Although some HAIs can be treated easily, others may more seriously affect a patient's health, increasing their stay in the hospital and hospital costs.
A total of 8.9 million HAIs were estimated to occur each year in European hospitals and long-term care facilities combined.
In 2016-2017, ECDC coordinated the second point-prevalence survey of healthcare-associated infections and antimicrobial use in European acute care hospitals and the third point-prevalence survey of healthcare-associated infections and antimicrobial use in European long-term care facilities.
76% of hospitals reported the availability of antimicrobial use guidelines.
Antimicrobials are sometimes given to patients to prevent infections, for example to prevent infections in relation with surgical procedures.
Depending on the country, all or none of the LTCFs have antimicrobial use guidelines.
More than half of certain HAIs are considered preventable.
Prolonged surgical prophylaxis represents a significant source of unnecessary use of antimicrobials in hospitals, which needs to be addressed across Europe.
3 out of 4 of the prophylaxis courses were given to prevent urinary tract infections.
Key messages: Antimicrobial use in healthcare settings
Moreover, only 1 in 5 LTFCs have regular training on appropriate antimicrobial prescribing.
1 in 10 antimicrobial prescriptions were for medical prophylaxis, for which there only is a limited number of indications.
1 in 2 surgical prophylaxis courses were prescribed for more than one day.
Parenteral-to-oral switch was reported in only 4% of the prescriptions of parenteral antimicrobials.
One dose is usually sufficient for surgical prophylaxis.
7 in 10 antimicrobials were prescribed for treatment of an infection and 3 in 10 for prophylaxis.
Antimicrobial agents to treat infections are life-saving, but overuse of antimicrobials may result in more frequent adverse effects and emergence of multidrug-resistant microorganisms.
Most prophylaxis courses may therefore represent unnecessary use of antimicrobials.
A proportion of antimicrobial prescriptions for medical prophylaxis may therefore represent unnecessary use.
1 in 3 patients received at least one antimicrobial on any given day.
Healthcare-associated infections and antimicrobial resistance European acute care hospitals and long-term care facilities
98 000 patients have at least one HAI;
HAIs in hospitals (for example, pneumonia, surgical site infections and bloodstream infections) are usually more severe and have a higher impact than HAIs in long-term care facilities (for example, respiratory infections other than pneumonia, urinary tract infections and skin and soft tissue infections).
Broad-spectrum antibiotics are not always necessary and their use drives antimicrobial resistance.
1 in 24 long-term care facilities residents have at least one HAI;
7 out of 10 antimicrobials were administered parenterally.
1 in 20 residents received at least one antimicrobials on any given day.
1 in 15 hospital patients have at least one HAI;
54% reported some dedicated staff time for antimicrobial stewardship.
excessively long durations of treatment.
Core tasks to improve antibiotic use in your facility include:
Seek guidance and advice from a senior colleague or a member of the antibiotic stewardship team.
Does the patient have an infection that will respond to antibiotics?
Avoiding diagnostic tests and cultures in asymptomatic patients [56,111].
antibiotic use in asymptomatic patients with positive cultures (colonisation);
Only start antibiotic treatment if there is evidence of a bacterial infection, and do not treat colonisation [31].
Always perform a clinical examination of the patient before prescribing an antibiotic [31].
Organise educational events and campaigns that provide residents with information on prudent antibiotic use.
Regularly participate in training courses and in meetings that support the implementation in the hospital of: a) prudent antibiotic use, b) evidence-based, local antibiotic guidelines, and c) infection prevention and control measures [52,53].
Education of medical and nursing staff, targeting areas where antibiotic misuse is common [109,110]:
Follow infection prevention and control measures that are already established in your setting.
Ensure that residents (and their families) understand the reasons for antibiotic therapy, and key points related to antibiotic use, including to [expert consensus]:
Promote vaccination programmes for residents and staff [expert consensus].
Take a thorough patient history when you prescribe an antibiotic, including recent antibiotic use, drug allergies, use of immunosuppressive therapy, and risk factors for antibiotic resistance (for example, recent hospitalisation, recent procedure or recent travel outside of Europe) [31].
Regularly organise audits/surveys of antibiotic prescribing practices and of healthcare-associated infections [93].
continue or stop antibiotic therapy;
Answer the following key questions when reassessing antibiotic therapy after 48-72 hours (or as soon as microbiological results are available) [42,70]:
Implement infection prevention and control measures together with infection prevention and control professionals [expert consensus].
d) Never share leftover antibiotics with other residents or other people.
Ensure that cultures are taken before starting antibiotics [31,42,70,71].
change to a narrow-spectrum antibiotic;
Reassessing antibiotic treatments in light of clinical conditions at 48-72 hours, or as soon as microbiological results are available, to [31,42,70-72]:
Education of patients and their families on the risks of selecting for antibiotic-resistant bacteria when using antibiotics unnecessarily (e.g. asymptomatic bacteriuria, viral respiratory tract infections) [109,110].
Using clinical pathways and evidence-based guidelines for diagnosing, treating and managing the most common infections (e.g. pneumonia, upper respiratory tract infections, skin and soft tissue infections, and urinary tract infections), and taking into account local antimicrobial susceptibility data [109].
Avoid unnecessary antibiotic prophylaxis (e.g. urinary tract infection prophylaxis) [111].
antibiotic prophylaxis;
Key messages for professionals working at hospitals and other healthcare settings: managers/administrators, infectious disease specialists, infection prevention and control professionals, epidemiologists, prescribers, junior doctors and students, pharmacists, nurses, clinical microbiologists, and professionals in emergency departments, in intensive care units, and in long-term care facilities.
Key messages for professionals in hospitals and other healthcare settings
Page 1 of 1 // 10 Results found
What can be done to solve the problem?
Why are some countries more affected than others?
Is the problem worse than in the past?
How serious is the problem?
Factsheet for general public
What is the resistance situation in other regions in the world?
It is not always possible to determine the proportion of resistant infections caused by a single factor.
Resistant E. coli may then spread between people.
Inappropriate use of antibiotics is a problem worldwide.
To address this public health concern, the Council of the European Union issued a recommendation in 2001 asking countries to put in place actions to ensure prudent use of antibiotics (Council recommendation of 15 November 2001 on the prudent use of antimicrobial agents in human medicine (2002/77/EC).
Prescribe antibiotics only when necessary, according to evidence-based guidelines.
It may also be transmitted from another person via direct contact (hands).
What is MRSA?
Antibiotic use is also associated with higher risk of acquiring MRSA.
The location of the infection depends on the bacteria and the patient's condition.
Ask your pharmacist about how to dispose of the remaining medicines
Data from the European Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Network (EARS-Net) show that there is a gradient North-South with low rates in Scandinavian countries and the Netherlands and high rates in Southern Europe.
On this basis, it is important to known when it is appropriate to take antibiotics and how to take antibiotics responsibly.
Surveillance data show that antimicrobial resistance is a growing public health problem in European hospitals and communities.
Antibiotic resistance and food-producing animals
MRSA is mainly acquired through direct contact from human to human or via equipment or medical devices.
While people still die in developing countries because they lack the correct antibiotic treatment, antibiotic resistance resulting from inappropriate use is causing concern in every continent.
Escherichia coli resistance to major antibiotics is increasing in almost all countries in Europe.
If you catch an infection due to MRSA, ask your doctor or nurse about which hygiene measures you and your family will have to comply with, in hospital and when you go back home.
Countries with lower resistance rates have generally lower use of antibiotics, whereas countries with higher antibiotic resistance rates use more antibiotics.
Typically, MRSA that is found in hospitals is resistant to many other antibiotics.
In the community, MRSA infections may occur if MRSA is introduced into the body through broken skin.
Does the use of antibiotics in food-producing animals contribute to the problem?
Advise patients why it is important that they comply with the treatment when they are prescribed antibiotics by a doctor.
Wash your hands and your children's hands regularly, for instance after sneezing or coughing before touching other things or people.
What is "inappropriate" use of antibiotics?
Staphylococcus aureus is a common bacterium, present on skin and mucosa in 20% to 30% of healthy people.
Because resistance is increasing and few new antibiotics have been discovered and marketed in recent years, the problem of antibiotic resistance is now a major public health threat.
Always follow your doctor's advice on when and how to use antibiotics.
Explain to patients how to relieve symptoms of colds and flu without antibiotics.
When it is resistant to methicillin (or to oxacillin, a type of penicillin), it is called MRSA or "Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus".
Everyone can play an important role in decreasing antibiotic resistance:
However, the major cause of antibiotic resistance in humans remains the use of antibiotics in human medicine.
Antibiotics, also known as antimicrobial drugs, are medicines that can kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria to cure infections in people, animals and sometimes plants.
Which antibiotics are used in food-producing animals?
Such bacteria may eventually become resistant to all existing antibiotics.
There are more than 15 different classes of antibiotics that differ in their chemical structure and their action against bacteria.
However, excessive and inappropriate use of antibiotics accelerates the emergence and spread of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
People may also acquire resistant bacteria from direct contact with animals.
E. coli is generally harmless but may sometimes cause infections, mainly urinary tract infections.
Antibiotics used to treat and prevent bacterial infections in animals belong to the same chemical groups as those used for humans: macrolides, tetracyclines, quinolones, beta-lactams, aminoglycosides.
Are they related to antibiotics used in humans?
Bacterial diseases would spread and could no longer be treated, causing death.
The main risk factors for resistant E. coli in the community are previous antibiotic treatment.
E. coli causes urinary tract and more serious infections and is one of the most common bacteria causing infections.
When possible, prevent infection through appropriate vaccination.
This may delay getting the right treatment to patients and may result in complications, including death.
An antibiotic may be effective against only one or multiple types of bacteria.
A more worrying problem is when some bacteria, that are normally susceptible to antibiotics, become resistant as a result of genetic changes (acquired resistance).
When you use antibiotics incorrectly: if you shorten the duration of treatment, lower the doses, don't comply with the right frequency (taking the drug once a day instead of 2 or 3 times a day as directed), you won't have enough drug in your body and the bacteria will survive and may become resistant.
Is antibiotic resistance a problem in Europe?
The World Health Organization (WHO) issued a global strategy and guidelines to help countries in setting up systems to monitor antibiotic resistance and to implement efficient actions (for instance, insuring that antibiotics can only be purchased with prescription).
When possible, prescribe an antibiotic that is specific to the infection and not "broad spectrum".
Treating infections due to resistant bacteria is a challenge: antibiotics commonly used are no longer effective and doctors have to choose other antibiotics.
In recent years, an increase in infections due to E. coli resistant to many antibiotics at the same time, including fluoroquinolones and third-generation cephalosporins, has been reported.
Not all antibiotics are active against all bacteria.
Getting an effective treatment for urinary tract infection due to resistant E. coli may be delayed, possibly resulting in serious complications such as kidney or bloodstream infection.
Antibiotic resistance is a natural occurrence caused by mutations in bacteria's genes.
What are antibiotics?
Doctors and other healthcare professionals, e.g. pharmacists and nurses:
When you use antibiotics for the wrong reason: most colds and flu are caused by viruses against which antibiotics are NOT effective.
Successful public awareness campaigns, which have already taken place in some countries, have resulted in a reduction of antibiotic consumption.
What are the causes of MRSA?
Responsible use of antibiotics can help stop resistant bacteria from developing and help keep antibiotics effective for the use of future generations.
Before the discovery of antibiotics, thousands of people died from bacterial diseases, such as pneumonia or infection following surgery.
What is the most important cause of antibiotic resistance?
These resistant bacteria may spread and cause infections in other people who have not taken any antibiotics.
Without antibiotics, we could return to the "pre-antibiotic era", when organ transplants, cancer chemotherapy, intensive care and other medical procedures would no longer be possible.
Certain resistant bacteria that are associated with food consumption, such as Campylobacter or Salmonella, may be transferred from animals to humans through food.
Therefore, animals may acquire bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics also used against human infections.
The risk in hospitals is that E. coli from your own gut could be introduced in blood or other tissue when performing invasive procedures such as surgery or injection.
Since antibiotics have been discovered and used, more and more bacteria, which were originally susceptible, have become resistant and developed numerous different means of fighting against antibiotics.
Follow your doctor's advice when taking antibiotics.
What are the causes of resistant E. coli?
Infections caused by resistant bacteria may require more care as well as alternative and more expensive antibiotics, which may have more severe side effects.
Keeping antibiotics effectives is everyone's responsibility.
Some countries launched national programmes, including public awareness campaigns, several years ago and have observed a decrease in both consumption of antibiotics and in antibiotic resistance.
In hospitals, MRSA may be introduced in blood or other tissue in the body on several occasions during care, especially when performing invasive procedures such as surgery, injection, ventilation.
Why is antibiotic resistance a problem?
What are the risks of MRSA in hospitals?
It may sometimes causes infections if it is introduced into the body.
To reduce this risk, hospitals put in place preventive actions: hand-washing or disinfection with alcohol-based solution, antisepsis before performing surgery, screening and isolation of patients at high risk of carrying resistant bacteria, and prudent use of antibiotics.
Resistant bacteria survive in the presence of the antibiotic and continue to multiply causing longer illness or even death.
To reduce this risk, hospitals put in place preventive actions: prudent use of antibiotics, antisepsis before performing surgery, aseptic procedures to prevent urinary tract infections, hand hygiene, and screening of patients at high risk of carrying resistant bacteria.
Previous antibiotic treatment, e.g. with fluoroquinolones, has been associated with higher risks of resistance in E. coli.
The situation is getting worse with the emergence of new bacterial strains resistant to several antibiotics at the same time (known as multidrug-resistant bacteria).
There are many reasons for different rates of resistance that can include antibiotic use, underlying diseases, quality of hospital care, immunisation rates and social factors.
Also, a patient may need more care as well as alternative and more expensive antibiotics, which may have more severe side effects.
Common characteristic appears to be close person-to-person contact.
When exposed to antibiotics, susceptible bacteria are killed and resistant bacteria can continue to grow and multiply.
It typically causes skin and wound infections but can cause pulmonary, surgical site, bloodstream, heart, bone and other invasive infections.
What are the risks of resistant E. coli in hospitals?
What is antibiotic resistance?
What are the risks of MRSA in the community?
Multidrug-resistant bacteria can cause a wide range of infections: urinary tract infection, pneumonia, skin infection, diarrhoea, bloodstream infection.
What are the risks of resistant E. coli in the community?
Community-associated MRSA (CA-MRSA) infections have been described in several countries, e.g. in athletic teams and prisons in North America, and transmission has been documented among family members.
It can then cause local skin infections or more life-threatening infections such as pneumonia, bloodstream infections and surgical site infections.
CA-MRSA infections are mainly skin infections (boils), abscesses; sometimes more severe infections may occur (e.g. bloodstream infections), above all if CA-MRSA produces a toxin, such as Panton-Valentine Leukocidin (PLV).
The most important thing to protect yourself and your family from MRSA is to comply with simple hygiene measures: clean and cover wounds, cuts and scrapes, keep your hands clean until they are healed, and avoid sharing personal items such as razors and towels.
Patients in hospitals are at risk for infections unrelated to the reason for admission, including bloodstream and surgical site infections like MRSA (caused by Staphylococcus aureus resistant to methicillin, an antibiotic representative of those which are usually effective against Staphylococcus aureus), bloodstream infections caused by Enterobacteriaceae producing ESBL (extended-spectrum beta-lactamases, enzymes able to destroy some antibiotics), heartvalve infections caused by Enteroccocci resistant to vancomycin, and surgical site and wound infections caused by Acinetobacter baumannii resistant to carbapenems.
Always use antibiotics under medical prescription, not using "leftovers" or antibiotics obtained without a prescription.
Escherichia coli or E. coli is one of the most common bacteria in the digestive tract (gut) of each of us.
It belongs to a family of bacteria called Enterobacteriacae (with Klebsiella, Enterobacter).
In such cases, you won't improve your condition by taking antibiotics: antibiotics don't lower fever or symptoms like sneezing.
Template letter for primary care prescribers
Page 3 of 5 // 50 Results found
The poster contains a key message that is deemed relevant overall for the hospital or the healthcare setting, followed by a set of actions that the hospital prescriber can/should/must implement to ensure that antibiotics remain effective.
Page 3 of 3 // 25 Results found
Professionals in emergency departments should only start antibiotic treatment if there is evidence of a bacterial infection, avoid unnecessary antibiotic prophylaxis, ensure that cultures are taken before starting antibiotics
Microbiologists can ensure that laboratory testing and antimicrobial susceptibility reporting follow treatment guidelines (including selective reporting), and include relevant comments on interpretation if needed.
Media type
Key messages for emergency departments - physicians and managers
You are in a key position to improve antibiotic use by collaborating with the antibiotic stewardship team
European Antibiotic Awareness Day
For example:
staff education,
Core tasks to improve the use of antibiotics in your department include:
For patients with sepsis, initiate effective antibiotic treatment via the intravenous route as soon as possible [90].
Implementing infection prevention and control strategies, including [86,87,105]:
establishing surveillance systems for healthcare-associated infections.
Organising regular multidisciplinary staff rounds and case discussions to improve the quality of antibiotic treatment [72].
Avoid unnecessary antibiotic prophylaxis [31].
Regularly participate in training courses and in meetings that support the implementation in the hospital of: a) prudent antibiotic use, b) evidence-based, local antibiotic guidelines, and c) infection prevention and control measures [52,53].
Take a thorough patient history when you prescribe an antibiotic, including recent antibiotic use, drug allergies, use of immunosuppressive therapy, and risk factors for antibiotic resistance (for example, recent hospitalisation, recent procedure or recent travel outside of Europe) [31].
Remain aware of local antibiotic resistance patterns in your department, your hospital and in the community [31,72].
Participating in education activities regularly, as well as proactive audits and feedback together with the antibiotic stewardship team [54,56].
Implement guidance (guidelines, protocols and checklists) for infection prevention and control measures, together with the infection prevention and control team [86,87] [expert consensus].
a) Complying with a central-line care protocol (for insertion and maintenance), reduces central-line-associated bloodstream infections in all types of intensive care units (adults and neonatal) [107].
Document the indication of antibiotic treatment, drug choice, dose, route of administration and duration of treatment in the patient chart[31,42,70,71].
Follow antibiotic treatment protocols, based on evidence-based guidelines that are established in your setting [31] [expert consensus].
Answer the following key questions when reassessing antibiotic therapy after 48-72 hours (or as soon as microbiological results are available) [42,70]:
Following infection prevention and control measures reduces the incidence of healthcare-associated infections.
Ensure that cultures are appropriately taken and send to the microbiology laboratory, before starting antibiotics [31,42,70,71].
Narrowing or streamlining antibiotic therapy leads to better patient outcomes [106].
Following antibiotic treatment protocols, based on evidence-based guidelines (e.g. for sepsis) [90].
Management of these risks as well as of the factors that contribute to control of communicable diseases are under the responsibility of each EU Member State.
In addition, more than 43 countries in the European region have had campaigns since that year, all under the EAAD umbrella.
Activities related to this topic at ECDC, take place under the Antimicrobial Resistance and Healthcare-associated Infections programme .
ECDC also launched, and regularly updates, a directory of online resources for the prevention and control of antimicrobial resistance and healthcare-associated infections to support EU Member States that need to develop national guidelines.
Since 2008, numerous health-related and professional organisations, as well as the European Commission and the World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe (WHO/Europe), have partnered with ECDC in preparing communications materials and planning activities targeting audiences such as the general public and professionals in hospitals.
Since 2015, the World Health Organization leads the World Antibiotic Awareness Week , a global campaign taking place on the week of the 18 November.
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) decided in 2008 to establish the European Antibiotic Awareness Day (EAAD) on 18 November as a platform for providing support to national campaigns across the region.
Finally, on 18 November each year, ECDC coordinates the European Antibiotic Awareness Day.
The mandate of ECDC is to identify and assess the risks of communicable diseases for EU citizens and communicate about these risks; this includes the area of antimicrobial resistance.
EAAD partners with World Antibiotic Awareness Week
Following adoption of the European Union (EU) Council Recommendation on the prudent use of antimicrobial agents in human medicine in November 2001, which stated that EU Member States should inform the general public of the importance of prudent use of antimicrobial agents and the success of some national campaigns, such as Belgium and France, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) decided in 2008 to establish the European Antibiotic Awareness Day (EAAD) on 18 November as a platform for providing support to national campaigns across the region.
• Seek guidance and advice from a senior colleague or a member of the antibiotic stewardship team;
Consider these messages in addition to those for the specific target groups that relate to your area of specialisation.
Before you prescribe an antibiotic, you should [25,26,53,70] [expert consensus]:
Ensure that patients (and their families) understand the reason for antibiotic therapy, and key points related to antibiotic use, including to [31,69] [expert consensus]:
b) Have the appropriate cultures been taken before starting antibiotic therapy?
Learn and apply all antibiotic use and infection prevention and control recommendations that are relevant to your area of specialisation [expert consensus].
When you see an antibiotic prescribed, ask the prescriber about the indication, choice, dose, route of administration and duration of treatment, to understand if this is follows antibiotic guidelines [69].
c) Never use leftover antibiotics from previous treatments; and
Things went wrong very quickly.
There were times when I was not sure if I would survive.
This time I'm hoping to see the country, not just the hospital.
I also missed family weddings and baptisms.
My name is Lill-Karin; I am a 66 year-old retired school teacher, with three grown-up children and five grandchildren.
In India, your family is expected to look after you in hospital, so I didn't see much of the doctors or nurses.
I didn't feel any symptoms of the infection, but it was a very difficult time.
I was kept alone in a special room and anyone who came to see me had to wear protective clothing.
It was a horrible experience but it hasn't stopped me wanting to travel; I am already planning my next trip to Kerala.
Thankfully, I am now fully recovered and free of the infection, but for a time I was very afraid of catching a cold or something worse.
I was also worried that the wound from my surgery would become infected as it still had not healed.
Being alone at that time was a terrible blow, I felt very low and extremely isolated.
I have lived alone since my husband died, and I spend my time reading, doing needlework, writing poems and travelling.
My host picked me up from the airport but before I could see the city, his car collided with a lorry.
I have been to India several times but had never visited Kerala, so in 2010 I planned a trip and arranged to stay with a local family.
These bacteria, which have the potential to travel across country borders, are often carried by patients who are transferred between healthcare systems.
Although this type of resistance is rare in Scandinavia, many other cases seen in Europe have been linked to hospitalisation abroad.
I was given a bowl of water once a day, but having a broken leg meant I couldn't move to wash myself or change my clothes, so I just lay there in the heat.
It was a very lonely few weeks with only my host for company, but eventually I was allowed to come home.
Back in Norway, I had to go straight back into hospital.
This leaves only a few, or no antibiotics available for treatment.
My family had a new baby so were scared to visit me, in case they caught the infection.
After arriving at the hospital, I spent two days on a plastic bed in a large room, surrounded by sick people.
It is important for physicians to be on the lookout for cases of patients carrying bacteria with such antibiotic resistance.
From my time in hospital I learnt the importance of strict hygiene and using disinfectant handwash and home cleaners to keep bugs at bay.
There has been a rise in the rates of such highly resistant bacteria throughout the world.
Molecular analysis showed that the isolate contained a gene responsible for producing the New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase (NDM-1), a novel carbapenemase.
This genetic element has been found in many bacteria and has spread globally, causing bacteria that carry the gene to be resistant to many antibiotics.
The K. pneumoniae isolate was found to produce the enzyme carbapenemase.
While in India, Lill-Karin underwent orthopaedic surgery and prophylactic antibiotic treatment with linezolid.
I had a badly broken leg and was rushed to hospital lying on the floor of an ambulance.
She was admitted to hospital in Norway with a variant of the bacterium Klebsiella pneumoniae in her urine that was resistant to multiple antibiotics.
Eventually, I was moved to a private room and had a hip replacement operation.
The bacterium was susceptible only to one antibiotic, colistin.
It showed resistance to all the following antibiotics: all beta-lactams (penicillins and cephalosporins, the carbapenems and aztreonam), the aminoglycosides, the fluoroquinolones (e.g. ciprofloxacin), trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and tigecycline.
The doctors found that I had an antibiotic-resistant bacterium in my urine, caused by a urinary catheter that I had had fitted during the surgery in India.
In this patient's case, her bacterium was only sensitive to colistin, an antibiotic which has to be given intravenously and can be toxic.
This bacterium was thought to have colonized her urine from a catheter fitted during surgery in India.
Key messages for all prescribers
Regularly participate in training courses and in meetings that support the implementation in the hospital of: a) prudent antibiotic use, b) evidence-based, local antibiotic guidelines, and c) infection prevention and control measures [52,53].
Remain aware of local antibiotic resistance patterns in your department, your hospital and in the community [31] [expert consensus].
For patients with severe infections, initiate effective antibiotic treatment as soon as possible [31,74].
primary care providers
Antibiotic resistance - an increasing threat to human health - Design files - EN - [ZIP-3.71 MB]
information material, toolkit material
A patient leaflet for primary care prescribers to hand out to patients: it explains to patients what antibiotic resistance is and why appropriate use of antibiotics is important.
Take care, not antibiotics (short)
Page 1 of 1 // 3 Results found
infographic information material toolkit material
Antibiotic consumption varies widely between EU/EEA countries.
In the countries with the highest consumption, people consume 3.4 times more antibiotics than in the countries with the lowest consumption.
Only 70 years after the introduction of antibiotics, we are facing the possibility of a future without effective antibiotics for treating patients infected by several types of bacteria.
In hospital sector, the latest ECDC data show that consumption of carbapenems - a last-line group of antibiotics - significantly increased in six countries and none of the countries showed a decrease.
Furthermore, the infographic shows the percentages of resistance against the most common groups of antibiotics.
Page 1 of 1 // 1 Results found
Factsheet for experts
Remove this filter Type: toolkit material
The major cause of antimicrobial resistance remains the use of antimicrobials in human medicine.
Antimicrobial resistance is the ability of a microorganism (e.g., a bacterium, a virus) to resist the action of an antimicrobial agent.
1/6 of Europeans are not aware that the misuse of antibiotics makes them less effective (with subtitles)
Prudent use of antibiotics can help stop resistant bacteria from developing and help keep antibiotics effective for the use of future generations.
The latest data confirms that across the European Union the number of patients infected by resistant bacteria is increasing and that antibiotic resistance is a major threat to public health.
The European Antibiotic Awareness Day is an annual European public health initiative that takes place on 18 November to raise awareness about the threat to public health of antibiotic resistance and the importance of prudent antibiotic use.
Using antibiotic guidance and attending educational rounds improve antibiotic prescribing.
Remove this filter Type: materiālu rīkkopa
Documenting indication, drug choice, dose, route of administration and duration of treatment in the patient chart leads to better use of antibiotics.
Provide guidelines for specimen collection, storage and transport [98,99].
Your tasks related to improving antibiotic use include [31,98-100] [expert consensus]:
f) Presenting data in a way that supports prudent antibiotic use, for example by selectively reporting to physicians a limited number of antimicrobial susceptibility results;
e) Communicating critical results promptly to the treating physician;
Ensure that laboratory testing and antimicrobial susceptibility reporting follow treatment guidelines (including selective reporting), and include relevant comments on interpretation if needed [31].
b) Collaborating with the infectious disease specialist and the hospital pharmacist to implement the antibiotic stewardship programme;
Train hospital prescribers regularly on antibiotic resistance, and on use of rapid and point-of-care diagnostic tests [31,53].
g) Providing guidelines for appropriate specimen collection, enforcing rejection criteria for specimens submitted inappropriately, and establishing procedures to limit the work-up of contaminants (e.g. blood cultures);
Provide data on antibiotic resistance at hospital level and ward level, and communicate trends to the antibiotic stewardship team and the infection prevention and control team [101].
i) Identifying critical trends in antibiotic resistance in the hospital and promptly communicating observations to the antibiotic stewardship team and the infection control team.
c) Supporting evidence-based hospital antibiotic guidelines for common infections and for surgical prophylaxis;
Ensure that testing and reporting of microbiology results follow European and national standards (i.e. European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing - EUCAST) [31].
j) Managing your hospital's antimicrobial formulary (i.e., list of drugs available for prescribers).
Ensure that identification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing results are communicated to prescribers, nurses and the antibiotic stewardship team especially for critical results (e.g. blood cultures) [98-100].
d) Timely identification and reporting of microorganisms (e.g. in blood cultures) and antimicrobial susceptibility testing;
h) Guiding empirical antibiotic therapy by providing hospital and ward specific (e.g. intensive care unit or emergency department) cumulative antimicrobial susceptibility data;
Factsheet for primary care prescribers
What is the problem?
e) Higher direct and indirect hospital costs.
a) Leadership commitment: ensuring the necessary resources in terms of staff, technology and budget are available.
The ECDC directory (link) contains online resources for developing guidelines.
How is our use of antibiotics contributing to the problem
Up to a half of all antibiotic use in European hospitals is unnecessary or inappropriate [6,37,38].
This resistance may be transferred to other bacteria [41].
These improvements did not cause any increase in adverse patient outcomes [46].
b) Appointing leaders that are responsible for the overall programme and for antibiotic use.
b) More adverse events, because alternative antibiotic therapies, that are more toxic, must often be used;
Examples of antibiotic stewardship strategies, actions and outcomes in European countries include:
Why hospitals should be promoting antibiotic stewardship?
In European hospitals, Clostridium difficile infections can lead to up to a 42% increase in mortality, 19 extra days of hospital stay, and more than EUR 14,000 of additional costs per patient [23,24].
Losing effective options for the treatment and prevention of infections is a global health security threat [31].
e) Antibiotic therapy is not reviewed after 48-72 hours, or the choice of antibiotic is not streamlined when microbiological culture data become available.
Antibiotics have long-term effects on the development and persistence of antibiotic resistance in the microbiota.
e) Training and education for medical, pharmacy, laboratory, nursing, and non-clinical staff, as well as patients and their families;
Increasingly, many European countries have national guidance on antimicrobial stewardship programmes for hospital prescribers.
Antibiotic resistance is more likely to develop and spread when [39] [expert consensus]:
d) Preventing and reducing antibiotic resistance, together with infection prevention and control measures.
c) Hospital-based teams, which include infectious disease specialists, clinical pharmacists and microbiologists, providing support to prescribers;
• Too low doses of antibiotics are used.
• 80% reported reduced expenditures;
a) Delayed access to effective antibiotic therapy for individual patients, causing treatment failures, longer illnesses, prolonged stays in hospital and increased morbidity and mortality;
How do antibiotic stewardship programmes work?
d) Proactive auditing of antibiotic prescriptions with feedback to team members;
The programme included antibiotic stewardship measures targeting carbapenem use [62].
Promoting prudent antibiotic use is both a patient safety and a public health priority [31,42].
The emergence of bacteria resistant to multiple classes of antibiotics is particularly concerning.
Antibiotics are often prescribed to patients in hospitals without explaining the importance of prudent antibiotic use [expert consensus].
Antibiotics are given to many hospital inpatients [35,36].
Antibiotic resistance threatens the health and safety of patients in all healthcare settings in Europe [1].
Gram-negative bacteria, such as Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Acinetobacter spp., are becoming resistant to most available antibiotics [16,17].
Such multidrug-resistant bacteria are a real and constant threat to clinical practice in all healthcare settings in Europe [1].
Misuse of antibiotics accelerates the emergence and dissemination of antibiotic resistance [8,31-34].
Availability of guidelines, consultation with infectious diseases specialist, and trainings represent the most helpful interventions to promote better use of antibiotics [25,27].
a) Delayed administration of antibiotics in critically ill patients;
• 96% hospitals reported reduced inappropriate prescribing;
h) Monitoring antibiotic resistance and use, and making this information available to prescribers.
Italy - A four-year infection control programme decreased the incidence of infections and colonisation caused by carbapenem-resistant bacteria in a teaching hospital.
In a recent survey of hospitals that had implemented an antibiotic stewardship programme [47]:
d) Reduced quality of patient stay due to anxiety because of the need for rigorous infection control measures;
Many prescribers do not know antibiotic resistance prevalence rates in their local setting [25,26], and recognise lacks in their training regarding antibiotic use [27].
Misusing antibiotics increases the risk of infections with multidrug-resistant bacteria [15].
c) Fewer effective antibiotic treatments for immunosuppressed patients and those undergoing surgical operations;
Spain - After only one year, education on guidelines combined with regular feedback led to a 26% improvement in the rate of appropriate treatments, and a 42% reduction of antibiotic consumption at a tertiary teaching hospital [67].
In a pooled analysis of antibiotic stewardship programmes, total consumption fell (by 19% hospital-wide and by 40% in intensive care units), overall antibiotic costs were reduced (by about one third), and the hospital length of stay shortened (by 9%).
Germany - Implementing a computerised decision support system led to higher adherence to locally adapted guidelines, increased antibiotic-free days and reduced mortality over a five-year period in five intensive care units [60].
Netherlands - Implementing rapid processing of microbiology tests increased the proportion of patients receiving appropriate treatment within the first 48 hours in a teaching hospital [63].
Sweden - Twice weekly audit and feedback in an internal medicine department led to an absolute 27% reduction of antibiotic use , especially of broad-spectrum antibiotics (cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones), as well as shorter antibiotic treatment durations and earlier switching to oral therapy [68].
• 58% reported reductions in antibiotic resistance.
• 71% reported reduced healthcare-associated infections;
f) Using evidence-based antibiotic guidelines and policies;
Cephalosporins, carbapenems, fluoroquinolones and anti-anaerobe antibiotics have a high risk of selecting for multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria [40].
The incidence of Clostridium difficile infections decreased in the medical and surgical wards of an acute general hospital in the United Kingdom in response to revised empirical antibiotic treatment guidelines for common infections and restrictive measures for fluoroquinolone and cephalosporin usage [48].
Antibiotic stewardship programmes, can contribute to [42,45,46] [expert consensus]:
Antibiotic stewardship programmes can successfully reduce Clostridium difficile infection rates [19,22,43,44,48].
France - Restricting use of fluoroquinolones reduced consumption of this class of antibiotics and decreased the rate of meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in a teaching hospital [58].
Misusing antibiotics increases the incidence of Clostridium difficile infections [19-22].
- Patients with bloodstream infections have a threefold higher mortality rate, prolonged hospital stays, and higher costs if their infection is due to third-generation cephalosporin-resistant Escherichia coli, compared with third-generation cephalosporin-susceptible isolates [12].
Antimicrobial management initiatives that promote prudent antibiotic use are called antibiotic stewardship programmes [19,42-45].
Antibiotic stewardship programmes can reduce patient care costs [42,45,46].
France - Using information technology support for antibiotic prescriptions decreased antibiotic consumption in many hospitals [59].
• Broad-spectrum antibiotics are used;
- Patients are up to three times more likely to die if their infections is caused by carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae, compared with carbapenem-susceptible isolates [14].
Netherlands - Case audits for the reassessment of antibiotic use after 48 hours reduced antibiotic consumption and length of stay in a urology ward of an academic hospital, and also had a positive direct return on investment [64,65].
• 86% reported reduced use of broad-spectrum antibiotics;
Hungary - Infectious disease specialist consultation in a surgical intensive care unit, together with a restricted prescribing policy, led to lower use of all antibiotics and a marked reduction in use of broad-spectrum antibiotics [61].
Antibiotics are misused when they are prescribed unnecessarily (i.e. antibiotic treatment is not clinically needed) or when they are prescribed inappropriately, i.e. one of the following [18]:
• 65% reported reduced length of stay or mortality;
Poland - Developing guidelines for antibiotic prescriptions and pre-authorisation approval for restricted antibiotics decreased total antibiotic consumption in a general paediatric ward [66].
d) The duration of antibiotic therapy is either too short or too long;
b) Increasing infection cure rates and reduce treatment failures;
b) The spectrum of antibiotic therapy is either too narrow or too broad;
c) The dose of antibiotic is either too low or too high;
• Long durations of antibiotics are used;
g) Using restrictive measures for antibiotic prescriptions (e.g., pre-approval and post-authorization requirements for specific antibiotics);
- Patients have a 24% increased risk of mortality with any antibiotic-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection [13].
Infections with multidrug-resistant bacteria can be severe, fatal and costly and can directly lead to [2-11] [expert consensus]:
Antimicrobial use in European hospitals and long-term care facilities - Design files - EN - [ZIP-4.26 MB]
If you wish to support the campaign, share messages, pictures or videos during the week 18-24 November 2019, using the hashtag #KeepAntibioticsWorking .
Only 70 years after the introduction of antibiotics, we are facing the possibility of a future without effective drugs to treat bacterial infections.
Tell the world what you do, in your professional or personal life, at individual or collective level, to use antibiotics responsibly and keep them working!
Because resistance is increasing and few new antibiotics have been discovered and marketed in recent years, antibiotic resistance is now a major public health threat.
Before the discovery of antibiotics, thousands of people died from bacterial diseases, such as pneumonia or infection following surgery.
On 18 November from 09.30 to 15.00 we will be tweeting live from our European Antibiotics Awareness Day 2019 Launch Event.
Again this year, on the occasion of EAAD, we are asking doctors, nurses, hospital managers, pharmacists, farmers, veterinarians, policymakers, professional and patient organisations, governmental institutions, and the general public to share a message.
Everyone is responsible for keeping antibiotics working.
Antibiotic resistance is the ability of bacteria to resist the action of an antibiotic.
Antibiotic resistance severely limits the number of antibiotics available for the treatment of a number of diseases.
There are a number of ways for you to join the EAAD social media movement in 2019.
Since antibiotics have been discovered and used, more and more bacteria, which were originally susceptible, have become resistant and developed numerous different means of fighting against antibiotics.
You can watch and participate in the discussion; the event will be live-streamed on our Facebook page.
Antibiotic resistance - where are we now?
When they are no longer effective, it is extremely difficult or, in many cases, impossible to treat these infections.
This is comparable to the total number of passengers of more than 100 medium-sized airplanes.
This is an increase from 2007 and is worrying because these antibiotics are the last treatment option available.
One DALY can be thought of as one lost year of "healthy" life.
The sum of these DALYs across the population, or the burden of disease, can be thought of as a measurement of the gap between current health status and an ideal health situation where the entire population lives to an advanced age, free of disease and disability.
Between 2007 and 2015, the burden of each of the 16 antibiotic-resistant bacteria under study has increased:
The key messages are based on an article published in The Lancet Infectious Diseases on 5 November 2018, Attributable deaths and disability-adjusted life-years caused by infections with antibiotic-resistant bacteria in the EU and the European Economic Area in 2015: a population-level modelling analysis.
This is a worrisome trend because these bacteria can spread easily in healthcare settings if adequate infection prevention and control measures are not in place.
Each year, 33000 people die as a direct consequence of an infection due to bacteria resistant to antibiotics.
75% of the burden of bacteria resistant to antibiotics in Europe is due to healthcare-associated infections.
Key messages: Health burden of antibiotic resistance
The article estimates the burden of five types of infections caused by antibiotic-resistant bacteria, (8 bacteria species, 16 antibiotic resistance-bacterium combinations) of public health concern in European Union and European Economic Area (EU/EEA) countries in 2015, measured in number of cases, attributable deaths and disabilityadjusted life years (DALYs).
The burden of infections with bacteria resistant to antibiotics on the European population is comparable to that of influenza, tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS combined.
The number of deaths attributable to infections with third-generation cephalosporin-resistant Escherichia coli increased four-fold.
39% of the burden is caused by infections with bacteria resistant to last-line antibiotics such as carbapenems and colistin.
The number of deaths attributable to infections with Klebsiella pneumoniae resistant to carbapenems - a group of last-line antibiotics - increased six fold.
This could be minimised through adequate infection prevention and control measures, as well as antibiotic stewardship in healthcare settings.
Infections with third-generation cephalosporin-resistant E. coli are responsible for the highest burden and more than half of these infections occur in the community.
Antimicrobial stewardship targeting primary care prescribers as well as infection prevention and control interventions in primary care are therefore necessary to reduce the burden of these infections.
e) Informing patients (and their families) about the indication for an antibiotic prescription, possible side effects, and their proper use.
c) Strengthening real-time follow-up and interpretation of microbiological culture data, by coordinating with the microbiology laboratory to efficiently share results to prescribers.
This should include the indication, drug choice, dose, route of administration and duration of treatment.
Clinical tasks related to improving antibiotic use include [102] [expert consensus]:
For patients with a severe infection, initiate effective antibiotic treatment as soon as possible [31,74].
b) Ensuring guidelines incorporate local microbiology and antibiotic resistance patterns, and reflect existing hospital formulary.
d) Educating staff on infectious diseases and prudent use of antibiotics.
a) Following local evidence-based antibiotic guidelines for common infections;
c) Taking relevant cultures, before starting antibiotic therapy, which will allow antibiotic therapy to be tailored or stopped during hospitalisation;
b) Deciding on the first antibiotic dose for inpatients;
d) Communicating all relevant patient background and treatment decisions to in- or out-patient follow-up practitioners.
Remain aware of local antibiotic resistance patterns in the community, hospital and department [31] [expert consensus].
You are in an important position to improve antibiotic prescribing in both inpatients and outpatients, since your facility sits at the interface of the hospital and the community [77].
Follow antibiotic treatment protocols, based on evidence-based guidelines (e.g. for sepsis [74], urinary tract infections [103], skin and soft tissue infections [104]), and apply infection prevention and control measures that are established in your setting [31] [expert consensus].
Antibiotic regimens started in your department strongly influence what therapy is continued in the hospital and community settings [77].
a) Making available evidence-based hospital antibiotic guidelines and clinical pathways for diagnosing, treating and managing the most common infections encountered in your department (i.e. respiratory tract infections, skin and soft tissue infections, urinary tract infections and sepsis).
Page 10 of 30 // 291 Results found
European Antibiotic Awareness Day
What are the key messages and how they will be used?
What is "expert consensus"?
The issues surrounding antibiotic resistance may differ in each EU/EEA country.
Key messages are the cornerstone of any communication campaign.
Cover a number of professionals working at hospitals and other healthcare settings: managers/administrators, infectious disease specialists, infection prevention and control professionals, epidemiologists, prescribers, junior doctors and students, pharmacists, nurses, clinical microbiologists, and professionals in emergency departments, in intensive care units, and in long-term care facilities.
Aim at creating a sense of individual responsibility in tackling antibiotic resistance and at empowering professionals to take action.
It is important to stress that the template materials developed by ECDC provide core information and common messages, but will be most effective if adapted to respond to the needs and situations in each country, and even each hospital or healthcare setting.
Provide a set of water-tight statements, each of which is accompanied by a reference, that should be used as a basis for the content of the template materials;
When, in this document, a reference to a message is indicated as "expert consensus", ECDC is referring to the agreement reached in the outlined decision-making process, including ECDC experts' internal agreement, EAAD TAC members' opinion, and consultation with external experts and stakeholders.
The key messages for the new toolkit:
European Antibiotic Awareness Day (EAAD) is a European health initiative coordinated by ECDC, which aims to provide a platform and support for national campaigns on the prudent use of antibiotics.
Countries could consider leveraging the national antibiotic resistance and antibiotic consumption data available from EARS-Net and ESAC-Net respectively, and consulting with national professional associations on the most appropriate tools to be used in their country.
To support communication activities at national level, ECDC has produced several communication toolkits containing template materials and evidence-based key messages which may be adapted for use at national level.
Each year across Europe, EAAD is marked by national campaigns on the prudent use of antibiotics on or around 18 November.
What is EAAD?
d) Facilitating communication between physicians, the pharmacy, the laboratory, discharge planners, consultants and patients;
e) Providing information on treatments to patients and families;
b) Coordinating the taking and sending of microbiological specimens, and their reporting back to physicians;
Inform the prescriber or pharmacist if you see a patient has an antibiotic prescription which has continued beyond seven days without specified duration [69].
Ensure that laboratory results are promptly communicated to the treating physician [expert consensus].
c) Reporting adverse effects of antibiotic therapy to physicians and appropriate review committees;
e) Take antibiotics exactly as prescribed;
You are in a key position to improve antibiotic use by collaborating with the antibiotic stewardship team [96].
Improve antibiotic administration practices in collaboration with doctors and pharmacists [96,97].
Prompt prescribers to document their reviewing decision for all patients on antibiotics after 48-72 hours [31,42,69].
Participate regularly in training courses and meetings on prudent antibiotic use, specimen collection, and infection prevention and control [53,96].
a) Administering antibiotics to patients according to the prescription;
Your tasks related to improving antibiotic use include [31,96,97] [expert consensus]:
f) Never save antibiotics for later use;
g) Managing antibiotic stocks on your ward, and ensuring the traceability of antibiotic use [expert consensus].
Ensure that cultures are appropriately taken and send to the microbiology laboratory, before starting antibiotics [31,42,70].
Follow infection prevention and control measures that are established in your setting [expert consensus].
f) Monitoring patient status on a 24 hour basis; and
h) Never share leftover antibiotics with other people.
g) Never use leftover antibiotics from previous treatments; and
Page 11 of 30 // 291 Results found
THE VOICE OF DENTISTS AND ORAL HEALTH IN EUROPE
These include:
Thinks you can do
Other tasks include [31,42,56,82,85-87]:
a) education and training,
This guidance can include guidelines, protocols and checklists [expert consensus].
f) decontamination of the environment,
c) aseptic techniques and clinical interventions,
• Point prevalence surveys, which give a snapshot picture of the number of patients with healthcare-associated infection in hospital at a particular point in time, and
If you see staff members at the hospital or healthcare setting who breaches guidelines or protocols, ask them why they are doing so and provide them with tools to understand what they are doing wrong [69] [expert consensus].
k) ensuring, from the board level to the ward, that all staff understand their role in preventing infections.
f) Ensuring antibiotic stewardship programmes are integrated with policies and
i) liaising with public health organisations,
The ECDC directory (link) contains online resources for prevention and control of healthcare-associated infections.
Greece - A three-year multifaceted infection control programme to control the spread of carbapenem-resistant bacteria in a haematology unit of a tertiary care hospital led to fewer infections caused by these bacteria [88].
c) Sharing information on local microbiology and antibiotic resistance patterns;
Use local data on healthcare-associated infections, set local targets and find areas where additional infection prevention and control support is needed [82,85] [expert consensus].
g) Educating all relevant healthcare professionals on infection prevention and control interventions to reduce the transmission of both antibiotic-resistant and antibiotic-susceptible bacteria.
h) vaccination of healthcare workers alongside occupational health,
Your task is to ensure that the fundamental elements of the hospital infection prevention and control programme are carried out [82,84,85] [expert consensus].
Monitor how effective targeted preventive measures are at reducing transmission of antibiotic-resistant bacteria [82,85] [expert consensus].
Make guidance for infection prevention and control measures to reduce healthcare-associated infections and transmission of microorganisms readily and reliably accessible.
e) Auditing and reporting healthcare-associated infections surveillance data;
b) Ensuring infection prevention and control guidelines, protocols and checklists are available for preventing both healthcare-associated infections and transmission of microorganisms
j) embedding infection prevention and control in all policies, and
Coordinate hospital surveillance of healthcare-associated infection through using both [82,85] [expert consensus]:
a) Coordinating hospital surveillance and prevention and control programmes of healthcare-associated infections;
• Long-term surveillance of the incidence of healthcare-associated infections (e.g. in intensive care units, or for specific infection types).
Organise and promote educational events, courses and meetings together with hospital administrators to strengthen infection prevention and control activities among all healthcare professionals (e.g. hand hygiene, contact precautions, active screening cultures, and environmental cleaning) [89].
Train healthcare professionals regularly on how to implement effective prevention and control strategies [82,85] [expert consensus].
d) Monitoring compliance with infection prevention and control guidelines;
programmes for infection prevention and control;
information material toolkit material
Checklist for prescribers in hospitals and other healthcare settings
The checklist was conceived as a small card that can be kept in white coat pockets and consulted as a reminder of prudent antibiotic prescribing.
Your tasks related to improving antibiotic use include [31,56,68,71,83]:
These should be readily and reliably accessible to all healthcare providers [56,69].
Provide feedback and advice to prescribers on diagnostic evaluation and treatment of infectious diseases [83].
Support the development and implementation of an antibiotic stewardship programme within your organisation [69].
Regularly train hospital prescribers on prudent antibiotic use and participate in meetings on implementing evidence-based hospital antibiotic guidelines [31,53].
Promote local guidelines on managing infections and using antibiotics.
c) Consulting with hospital prescribers and providing them with feedback to ensure the quality of antibiotic prescribing;
b) Collaborating with the hospital pharmacist and the clinical microbiologist to implement the antibiotic stewardship programme;
d) Educating hospital prescribers on how to diagnose and treat common infections, and on the antibiotic stewardship principles;
e) Implementing evidence-based hospital antibiotic guidelines for common infections and for surgical prophylaxis;
f) Sharing information on local microbiology and antibiotic resistance patterns; and,
g) Managing your hospital's antibiotic formulary (i.e., list of drugs available for prescribers).
